Building the Knightâ€™s Tour Graph
================================

To represent the knightâ€™s tour problem as a graph we will use the
following two ideas: Each square on the chessboard can be represented as
a node in the graph. Each legal move by the knight can be represented as
an edge in the graph. Figure 1 &lt;fig\_knightmoves&gt; illustrates the
legal moves by a knight and the corresponding edges in a graph.

![Figure 1: Legal Moves for a Knight on Square 12, and the Corresponding
Graph](Figures/knightmoves.png)

To build the full graph for an n-by-n board we can use the Python
function shown in Listing 1 &lt;lst\_knighttour1&gt;. The `knightGraph`
function makes one pass over the entire board. At each square on the
board the `knightGraph` function calls a helper, `genLegalMoves`, to
create a list of legal moves for that position on the board. All legal
moves are then converted into edges in the graph. Another helper
function `posToNodeId` converts a location on the board in terms of a
row and a column into a linear vertex number similar to the vertex
numbers shown in Figure 1 &lt;fig\_knightmoves&gt;.

**Listing 1**

    from pythonds.graphs import Graph

    def knightGraph(bdSize):
        ktGraph = Graph()
        for row in range(bdSize):
           for col in range(bdSize):
               nodeId = posToNodeId(row,col,bdSize)
               newPositions = genLegalMoves(row,col,bdSize)
               for e in newPositions:
                   nid = posToNodeId(e[0],e[1],bdSize)
                   ktGraph.addEdge(nodeId,nid)
        return ktGraph

    def posToNodeId(row, column, board_size):
        return (row * board_size) + column

The `genLegalMoves` function (Listing 2 &lt;lst\_knighttour2&gt;) takes
the position of the knight on the board and generates each of the eight
possible moves. The `legalCoord` helper function
(Listing 2 &lt;lst\_knighttour2&gt;) makes sure that a particular move
that is generated is still on the board.

**Listing 2**

:

    def genLegalMoves(x,y,bdSize):
        newMoves = []
        moveOffsets = [(-1,-2),(-1,2),(-2,-1),(-2,1),
                       ( 1,-2),( 1,2),( 2,-1),( 2,1)]
        for i in moveOffsets:
            newX = x + i[0]
            newY = y + i[1]
            if legalCoord(newX,bdSize) and \
                            legalCoord(newY,bdSize):
                newMoves.append((newX,newY))
        return newMoves

    def legalCoord(x,bdSize):
        if x >= 0 and x < bdSize:
            return True
        else:
            return False

Figure 2 &lt;fig\_bigknight&gt; shows the complete graph of possible
moves on an eight-by-eight board. There are exactly 336 edges in the
graph. Notice that the vertices corresponding to the edges of the board
have fewer connections (legal moves) than the vertices in the middle of
the board. Once again we can see how sparse the graph is. If the graph
was fully connected there would be 4,096 edges. Since there are only 336
edges, the adjacency matrix would be only 8.2 percent full.

![Figure 2: All Legal Moves for a Knight on an $8 \times 8$
Chessboard](Figures/bigknight.png)
