Dictionaries
============

The second major Python data structure is the dictionary. As you
probably recall, dictionaries differ from lists in that you can access
items in a dictionary by a key rather than a position. Later in this
book you will see that there are many ways to implement a dictionary.
The thing that is most important to notice right now is that the get
item and set item operations on a dictionary are $O(1)$. Another
important dictionary operation is the contains operation. Checking to
see whether a key is in the dictionary or not is also $O(1)$. The
efficiency of all dictionary operations is summarized in
Table 3 &lt;tbl\_dictbigo&gt;. One important side note on dictionary
performance is that the efficiencies we provide in the table are for
average performance. In some rare cases the contains, get item, and set
item operations can degenerate into $O(n)$ performance but we will get
into that in a later chapter when we talk about the different ways that
a dictionary could be implemented.

For our last performance experiment we will compare the performance of
the contains operation between lists and dictionaries. In the process we
will confirm that the contains operator for lists is $O(n)$ and the
contains operator for dictionaries is $O(1)$. The experiment we will use
to compare the two is simple. Weâ€™ll make a list with a range of numbers
in it. Then we will pick numbers at random and check to see if the
numbers are in the list. If our performance tables are correct the
bigger the list the longer it should take to determine if any one number
is contained in the list.

We will repeat the same experiment for a dictionary that contains
numbers as the keys. In this experiment we should see that determining
whether or not a number is in the dictionary is not only much faster,
but the time it takes to check should remain constant even as the
dictionary grows larger.

Listing 6 &lt;lst\_listvdict&gt; implements this comparison. Notice that
we are performing exactly the same operation, `number in container`. The
difference is that on line 7 `x` is a list, and on line 9 `x` is a
dictionary.

**Listing 6**

Figure 4 &lt;fig\_listvdict&gt; summarizes the results of running
Listing 6 &lt;lst\_listvdict&gt;. You can see that the dictionary is
consistently faster. For the smallest list size of 10,000 elements a
dictionary is 89.4 times faster than a list. For the largest list size
of 990,000 elements the dictionary is 11,603 times faster! You can also
see that the time it takes for the contains operator on the list grows
linearly with the size of the list. This verifies the assertion that the
contains operator on a list is $O(n)$. It can also be seen that the time
for the contains operator on a dictionary is constant even as the
dictionary size grows. In fact for a dictionary size of 10,000 the
contains operation took 0.004 milliseconds and for the dictionary size
of 990,000 it also took 0.004 milliseconds.

![Figure 4: Comparing the `in` Operator for Python Lists and
Dictionaries](Figures/listvdict.png)

Since Python is an evolving language, there are always changes going on
behind the scenes. The latest information on the performance of Python
data structures can be found on the Python website. As of this writing
the Python wiki has a nice time complexity page that can be found at the
[Time Complexity Wiki](http://wiki.python.org/moin/TimeComplexity).

